H-603, BP-26: Add `Tech Tree` & `Structured Data` HDEV posts (#2155)
hashintel/hash: apps/hashdotdev/src/_pages/blog/0014_structured-data-value.mdx

Second, simulations have historically required handoff between:

1. data engineers and analysts who make the data available which is required to instantiate 'agents' in a simulation, and hydrate them with 'properties' that describe them accurately
2. programmers who're able to encode subject matter expertise _in code_ that provides 'behavioral logic' to the agents, and environment within which they reside
3. domain experts, who understand how the target system functions, and can actually provide the subject matter expertise and model design required.

> These different stakeholders and the communication/coordination/iteration loops involved in getting simulation models accurate _and useful_ were frankly killer. With data structuring and availability problems potentially already solved by foundation models (as outlined above), **we believe foundation models' further potential lies in enabling domain experts to bypass programmers and iterate on simulation logic directly.** Behaviors within simulations are generally relatively simple, standalone things. Natural language behavior developement seems eminently achievable using current-generation (e.g. GPT-4) models.

Reviewer: > These different stakeholders and the communication/coordination/iteration loops involved in getting simulation models accurate _and useful_ were frankly killer.

This parses as 'These different stakeholders and the communication loops involved were frankly killer' – I _think_ it is aimed at saying 'this often made simulation too difficult', but I think it could be rephrased. Maybe something like this.

```suggestion
The number of different stakeholders and the communication/coordination/iteration loops involved in getting simulation models accurate _and useful_ were often a killer to getting them off the ground. With data structuring and availability problems potentially already solved by foundation models (as outlined above), **we believe foundation models' further potential lies in enabling domain experts to bypass programmers and iterate on simulation logic directly.** Behaviors within simulations are generally relatively simple, standalone things. Natural language behavior developement seems eminently achievable using current-generation (e.g. GPT-4) models.
```

The role of structured data in all this is simple.

**Predictive simulations of real-world things are extremely easy to get wrong.** Many interesting systems that users typically want to simulate end up being "complex systems" in some respect, demonstrating some degree of nonlinearity due to emergent or adaptive behaviors.

> Complex systems are typically extremely sensitive to their initial conditions. Ensuring an as close to accurate starting or "initial state" is therefore key. Pre-structured data, especially if itself tested and reviewed, or produced in accordance with a well-understood process or pipeline, can improve confidence in this.

Reviewer: Arguably 'data' could be plural here, but I think 'itself' can just be removed altogether to avoid the question
```suggestion
Complex systems are typically extremely sensitive to their initial conditions. Ensuring an as close to accurate starting or "initial state" is therefore key. Pre-structured data, especially if tested and reviewed, or produced in accordance with a well-understood process or pipeline, can improve confidence in this.
```

In addition to providing the initial state of a simulation, structured data can be used directly for verification and validation purposes, including as a means of backtesting simulation experiments, and individual behaviors themselves. In a world where behaviors and whole simulation models may be generated by foundation models, this provides humans with an improved sense of their likely correctness.

## More for humans than machines

> All this serves to highlight an interesting possibility. If to date structured data has existed for the benefit of _machines_, is it possible that in the future its primary use will in fact me to us, _humans_, in verifying and validating the outputs of machine-generated models: simulation, language, multimodal, or other?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All this serves to highlight an interesting possibility. If to date structured data has existed for the benefit of _machines_, is it possible that in the future its primary use will in fact be to us, _humans_, in verifying and validating the outputs of machine-generated models: simulation, language, multimodal, or other?
```

Inherently tied to the idea of structured data are _types_. Data may be of a certain 'type' if it follows a set of rules established by that type.

One way of thinking about structured data is the [Block Protocol type system](https://blockprotocol.org/docs/types), which outlines three different kinds of types: data types, property types, and entity types.

> 1. **Entites** (semantic 'things' in a database) have entity types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Entities** (semantic 'things' in a database) have entity types.
```

>   - **Entity types** describe the _properties_ and type(s) of any outgoing _link entities_ that can be associated with an entity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **Entity types** describe the _properties_ and type(s) of any entity, including _link entities_.
```

>   - **Link entities** are the relationships, or 'things' that connect other entities. For example, one `Person` entity may be connected by a linked entity called `Spouse` to another `Person`.

Reviewer: Or possibly `Marriage` – `Spouse` describes the person rather than the relationship
```suggestion
  - **Link entities** are the relationships, or 'things' that connect other entities. For example, one `Person` entity may be connected by a link entity called `Has Spouse` to another `Person`.
```

  - Right now, entities can only have one entity type, but we intend to support entities with multiple entity types in the specification soon.
2. **Properties** contain data associated with some particular aspect of an entity.

>   - **Property types** describe the possible values can be associated with a property, by way of reference to _data types_ and other properties.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **Property types** describe the possible values that can be associated with a property, by way of reference to _data types_ and other property types.
```

3. **Data types** describe a space of possible valid values (e.g. `string`, `number` or `boolean`).

>   - Support for defining "custom" data types, i.e. "non-primitive" data types which are not found in the Block Protocol's [graph module specification](https://blockprotocol.org/docs/spec/graph) is coming soon.

Reviewer: I wouldn't say 'non-primitive' as they still describe primitive values (e.g. a 'string'), it's just that they are more constrained in what values are valid than the default ones
```suggestion
  - Support for defining "custom" data types which are not found in the Block Protocol's [graph module specification](https://blockprotocol.org/docs/spec/graph) is coming soon (e.g. numbers within a certain range, or strings matching a certain pattern).
```

Author: @CiaranMn FYI this was pulled from the RFC PR title, so we may want to change: https://github.com/blockprotocol/blockprotocol/pull/355 cc @thehabbos007 @Alfred-Mountfield

Reviewer 2: Happy to change it too, it was a somewhat temporary title, and was suggested by @benwerner01. 

Previously we were calling them "custom data types" or "user data types" but he suggested 'non-primitive' to avoid some confusion (unfortunately I can't remember what the confusion was), and non-primitive was due to us referring to the base data types _as_ primitive data types within the spec, [see here](https://github.com/blockprotocol/blockprotocol/blob/main/rfcs/text/0352-graph-type-system.md#primitive-top-level-data-types) and [here](https://github.com/blockprotocol/blockprotocol/blob/main/rfcs/text/0352-graph-type-system.md#primitive-top-level-data-types-1).

Reviewer 2: (I've unresolved it just to make this thread more discoverable, not asking for any further changes)

Author: User-defined or custom sounds fine to me.

The open-source [HASH type editor](https://github.com/hashintel/hash/tree/main/libs/%40hashintel/type-editor) makes it easy to create and edit Block Protocol types.

> Both defining types in the first place, and the act of typing data, minimize the potential for errors, improve the readability or intelligibility of data, and can enable optimized processing of it. A piece of information's type can be used to ascertain specific meaning and purpose, as well as confirm its validity.

Reviewer: I initially thought 'Both...' was still referring to the the type editor's capabilities. I think removing it avoids that potential for confusion.
```suggestion
Defining types in the first place, and the act of typing data, minimize the potential for errors, improve the readability or intelligibility of data, and can enable optimized processing of it. A piece of information's type can be used to ascertain specific meaning and purpose, as well as confirm its validity.
```

Asking for model outputs in a set of user-created types improves confidence in those outputs.

Building a simulation or other model from a set of strongly typed data equally improves reliability.

> In all agent-to-agent (human-human, machine-machine, and human-machine) communications, ontologies of types enable improved mutual understanding by formalizing and standardizing definitions of things and streamlining communication around them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In all agent-to-agent communications (human-human, machine-machine, and human-machine), ontologies of types enable improved mutual understanding by formalizing and standardizing definitions of things and streamlining communication around them.
```

---
authors:
  - name: David Wilkinson
    jobTitle: CEO, HASH
    photo: blog/authors/david-wilkinson.jpg
postPhoto: blog/0014_structured-data-value/14_structured-data-value.webp
title: "The long-term value of structured data"
subtitle: "Structured data's diminished but persistent value in a world with large machine learning models"
date: "2023-04-01"
---

## Relevancy in a new world

Advocates for a machine-readable **semantic web**, have long argued in favour of structured data **markup** (e.g. Microformats/RDFa) and **mapping** (JSON-LD).

> And yet we now live in a world in which 'foundation' models, both large _language_ (LLM) and _multimodal_ (LMM), effectively thrive off of nothing more than being exposed to the web's vast soup of unstructured information.

Author: ```suggestion
And yet we now live in a world in which 'foundation' models, both large _language_ (LLM) and _multimodal_ (LMM) are able to thrive when faced with nothing more than the web's vast soup of unstructured information.
```

We created the [Block Protocol](https://blockprotocol.org/) because we believed (and still believe) that block-based interfaces in content management systems can make it as easy, _or even easier_, to capture information in a cleanly-typed and structured fashion than it can be to manually insert it from scratch. For example, the Mapbox-enabled [Address block](https://blockprotocol.org/@hash/blocks/address) with its search and autofill capabilities makes it _quicker_ to enter a location, store it as structured data, and serve JSON-LD on a webpage than it would be to simply enter a full address out _manually_ by hand as unstructured text. In addition, you (optionally) get to insert a nice map! A win-win all round.

> **Does that matter any more?** For the semantic web: probably not. The semantic web's vision of an internet that is both human and machine-readable will happen now. Foundation models will structure the unstructured web for us... or at least the parts of it that we or they can access. This is what those large models excel at: ascertaining patterns and structure, without the need for markup or mapping. Whether more slowly over time, or in an accelerating fashion, these models will continue to improve.

Author: Worked these suggestions into https://github.com/hashintel/hash/pull/2155/commits/77838139d079ae0d0beacd1f7d19b6089ad0b7a0

Let me know if you feel they're spoken for sufficiently (and do feel free to suggest follow-up improvements; looking to merge this today, but further comments welcome).

> **But the value of structured data isn't going away.** That, after all, is what foundation models are doing. They're learning the structure of things, and then calculating answers to specific questions, in accordance with those understood structures. We humans rely on structure. Our thoughts, plans are actions are predicated upon it. So the _real_ question is not "does structured data matter?", but "does having **pre-structured** data continue to yield benefits?"

Author: They're sequence predictors. They work by observing patterns and trying to predict the next token. I think we can make this claim.

But let's not be lazy. Let's imagine a future in which time-to-results and marginal costs do decrease dramatically. Compute and model runtime costs have come down, existing models have been optimized, and new models have been developed. What then? And what about other use cases?

## Enduring value

Right now, one of the things structure affords is the ability to browse in an undirected, but logically coherent fashion. It aides in open-ended exploration of problem spaces and information, and helps us draw meaning from information, learning incrementally. While we may be able to explore a topic with a large language model as our aide, its answers might guide us down particular paths it (or its creators) are biased towards. This is a real risk with the kind of RLHF (reinforcement learning with human feedback) used to produce many foundation models today. Conversely, being able to see raw structured information for yourself and find your own patterns and meaning in it might take a lot longer than the 5 seconds that an OpenAI query might take to return, but the bias you bring to the information will be your own. Combining forms of analysis may prove commonplace.

> While large models learn well from unstructured data, they still learn better from structured data, and in particular high-quality, curated sets of data. It's one of the reasons that high-quality corpuses (such as that of Stack Overflow) are weighted so highly in the training texts that large language models use. And as the internet becomes increasingly full of convincing-sounding machine-generated content that can be hard or impossible to distinguish from stuff written by actual human experts, it stands to reason that training new foundation models will become more difficult in the future. While machine-generated synthetic data has many benefits, its presence in [too large a quantity](https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.01850) can degrade the quality (precision) and diversity (recall) of generative models trained using them. [HASH](https://hash.ai/) ensures that the provenance of information in a user or organization's web (their graph of data) is clear, and generated outputs are (internally at least) marked as such.

Reviewer: > it stands to reason that training new foundation models will become more difficult in the future

This is a strong claim that could possibly be tempered – any increase in difficulty in training new models because of this might be offset by mitigations for it, or in significant decreases in difficulty because of new techniques etc

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/hashintel/hash/pull/2155/commits/77838139d079ae0d0beacd1f7d19b6089ad0b7a0

Resolve thread if happy, or we can keep going.

Explicitly created and defined structures will continue to have relevance in a world of powerful foundation models which are capable of inferring structure on demand.

Pre-structured data will:

- enable applications to interface with each other without requiring foundation models to perform a 'reconciliation' step, transforming one's outputs to another's inputs
- provide safety and confidence through verification and validation: even where reconciliation may be conducted by foundation models, having example structured data will enable model-produced translations to be tested
- provide a cost benefit: data does not need to be structured at the point of need, it already exists
- provide a time benefit: data is instantly available, again not requiring computation on the fly
- act as an always-available fallback in the event of foundation model unavailibilty or disconnection

These features of pre-structured data, combined with foundation models, will unlock and mainstream new technologies and best practices.

## Increasing value

> With thanks to both foundation models _and_ pre-structured data, we may finally see certain frontiers unlocked. One thing we're betting on at HASH is that **simulation** will finally come of age, as a widely-used tool for everyday decisionmaking.

Reviewer: maybe?
```suggestion
With thanks to both foundation models _and_ pre-structured data, we may finally see certain frontiers unlocked. One thing we're betting on at HASH is that **simulation** will finally come of age, as a widely-used tool for informing everyday decisionmaking.
```

Author: Going to pass on this one. Informing will be the primary use, but hopefully substituting in certain cases as well (automatic optimization under safe parameters and bounds, etc.)

### The cost of coordination

The second major blocker to mainstream development and adoption of simulation is one of coordination. Simulations have historically required handoff between:

1.  data engineers and analysts who make the data available which is required to instantiate 'agents' in a simulation, and hydrate them with 'properties' that describe them accurately;

> 2.  programmers who're able to encode subject matter expertise _in code_ that provides 'behavioral logic' to the agents, and environment within which they reside;

Reviewer: if 'behavioral logic' should be applied to 'environment' I'd drop the comma, otherwise I think something else is needed, e.g.
```suggestion
2.  programmers who're able to encode subject matter expertise _in code_ that provides 'behavioral logic' to the agents, and define the environment within which they reside;
```

3.  domain experts, who understand how the target system functions, and can actually provide the subject matter expertise and model design required;
4.  data scientists, who run the actual experiments required to derive real insight from probabilistic models; and
5.  decision makers, who are understandably deeply skeptical of whiz-bang simulation models that promise to predict the future. It's "shit in, shit out" with these things, and with so many steps and people involved, by the time a model has been built and experiments run it's entirely fair (and a good idea) to have questions about model integrity.

The number of different stakeholders, and amount of multi-party communication involved in a single iteration loop required to make simulation models accurate _and useful_ often proved killer to getting simulations off the ground. The average model has historically required many such iterations.

> Now, with the picture around data structuring and availability much improved by foundation models (as outlined above), we believe such models' further potential lies in **enabling domain experts to bypass programmers and iterate on simulation logic directly.** Behaviors within simulations are generally relatively simple, standalone things. Natural language behavior developement seems eminently achievable using current-generation (e.g. GPT-4 or fine-tuned GPT-3.5) models alone.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, with the picture around data structuring and availability much improved by foundation models (as outlined above), we believe such models' further potential lies in **enabling domain experts to bypass programmers and iterate on simulation logic directly.** Behaviors within simulations are generally relatively simple, standalone things. Natural language behavior development seems eminently achievable using current-generation models alone (e.g. GPT-4 or fine-tuned GPT-3.5).
```

### Structure and simulation

The role of structured data in all of this is quite simple.

> **Predictive simulations of real-world things are extremely easy to get wrong.** Many interesting systems that users typically want to simulate end up being "complex systems" in some respect, demonstrating some degree of nonlinearity due to emergent or adaptive behaviors. This is both because (a) any system involving a human is inherently complex, and because (b) "closed systems" (the only ones we can fully model without doubt, where all parameters and environmental variables are known) quite simply do not exist in the real world. Simulations are simplifications of the real world: downsized, abstracted, or analogical.

Reviewer: Could this para directly address structured data's role? The following two do so helpfully. or is this a set up for the next two? If the latter might be worth formatting it differently

### More for humans than machines

All this serves to highlight an interesting possibility. If to date structured data has existed for the benefit of _machines_, is it possible that in the future its primary use will in fact be to us, _humans_, in verifying and validating the outputs of generative AI models: simulation, language, multimodal, or other?

Inherently tied to the idea of structured data is the idea of **typing** information. Data may be of a certain 'type' if it follows a set of rules established by that type.

The [Block Protocol type system](https://blockprotocol.org/docs/types) outlines three different kinds of types which can help us think about structured data: entity types, property types, and data types.

1.  **Entities** (semantic 'things' in a database) have entity types.

- **Entity types** describe the _properties_ and type(s) of any entity, including both special-cased _link entities_ and ordinary, plain old _standard entities_.

> - A **link entity** corresponds to the relationship, or 'thing' that connects other entities. For example, a standard entity `Person` may be connected by a link entity called `Spouse` to another standard entity `Person`.

Reviewer: Or maybe 'Married To'? I think `Spouse` is a bit more confusing because it refers to a party to the relationship rather than the relationship itself
```suggestion
- A **link entity** corresponds to the relationship, or 'thing' that connects other entities. For example, a standard entity `Person` may be connected by a link entity called `Marriage` to another standard entity `Person`.
```

Author: ```suggestion
- A **link entity** corresponds to the relationship, or 'thing' that connects other entities. For example, two standard `Person` entities may be connected by a `Married To` link entity.
```

- A **standard entity** is absolutely anything that isn't a link entity. You can use it to refer to physical things, concepts, ideas, events, or anything else you like.
- If you're familiar with graph theory, you can think of standard entities as vertices, and link entities as edges.

2.  **Properties** contain data associated with some particular aspect of an entity.

- **Property types** describe the possible values that can be associated with a property, by way of reference to _data types_ and other property types.

3.  **Data types** describe a space of possible valid values (e.g. `string`, `number` or `boolean`). They allow for validation logic to be shared amongst different kinds of property types which represent semantically different things.

> - Support for user-definition of "non-primitive" data types (e.g. numbers within a certain range, or strings matching a certain pattern) which are not already found in the Block Protocol's [graph module specification](https://blockprotocol.org/docs/spec/graph) is planned ([draft RFC](https://github.com/blockprotocol/blockprotocol/pull/355)).

Reviewer: I would say 'custom data types', or 'data types with custom constraints', or something like that... these are still primitive data types, but with validation constraints.
```suggestion
- We are also planning support for user-defined custom data types (e.g. numbers within a certain range, or strings matching a certain pattern) which are not already found in the Block Protocol's [graph module specification](https://blockprotocol.org/docs/spec/graph). Read the [draft RFC](https://github.com/blockprotocol/blockprotocol/pull/355) for more.
```
